# Organizational Poverty in Nonprofit Organizations:  Why Do Non-Profits Persistently Underinvest in  Organizational Capabilities?
## Authors: David Keith, Lauren Taylor, James Paine, Richard Weisbach, Anthony Dowidowicz
## Year: 2022
## Journal: Journal of Organization Science
## DOI: TBC
## Abstract:
Nonprofit organizations have been observed to persistently underinvest in organizational capabilities, despite widespread academic and practitioner acknowledgment that building organizational capabilities is critical to improved organizational performance. Why is this?  We develop a model based on ethnographic fieldwork with six nonprofit organizations that illuminates the relationships between organizational performance, funder perceptions, and investments in programmatic versus non-programmatic activities. Inherent in nonprofit management is the need to raise funds from donors, who are distinct from the recipients of the nonprofit’s services. Given difficulties observing the objective impact of nonprofit programs, many donors rely on ‘overhead ratio' as a measure of operational efficiency, measured as the fraction of non-programmatic expenses over total expenses. While the validity of overhead as an effective indicator of organizational efficiency has been questioned repeatedly, it persists as a widely reported across nonprofit sectors. In this paper, we show that nonprofit managers' keenness to manage their reputation with funders leads them to underinvest in organizational capabilities so as to keep their overhead ratio low. We argue that the performance challenges faced by many nonprofits can be explained by this boundedly-rational bias towards programmatic spending, which has the unintended consequence of starving the organization of essential investments in organizational capabilities. We find that building and sustaining high capability nonprofits requires a shared understanding between managers and donors that greater evaluation based on performance rather than overhead ratios is likely to be required, and that deliberately doing less while the organization builds its capability may be the best strategy to ultimately do more.



